
---
title: "Problem set 2"
linktitle: "PS 2"
date: "2020-09-01"
due_date: "2020-09-18"
due_time: "02:20 PM"
menu:
  assignment:
    parent: Problem Sets
    weight: 2
type: docs
toc: true	
weight: 2
editor_options: 
  chunk_output_type: console
---

1.  Read MM Chapter 1, which you can download from Blackboard. We will
    discuss some of these concepts in class on Tuesday. Answer the
    following questions based on the readings.

    1.  In the Oregon Health Insurance Experiment, explain in layman's
        terms why Finkelstein and co-authors did not measure the impact
        of health insurance by comparing those who had Medicaid to those
        who were uninsured?

    2.  In the Oregon Health Insurance Experiment, explain in layman's
        terms why Finkelstein and co-authors did not instead take all
        new enrollees, and compare their health before the expansion vs.
        after the expansion?

    3.  Using potential outcomes notation, show how Finkelstein's
        randomized approach addresses the concerns raised in parts (a)
        and (b).

    4.  What was the causal impact of "winning the lottery" -- being
        offered the OHP -- on whether respondents were admitted to the
        hospital? Was this effect statistically significant?

    5.  Did insurance make people healthier? Explain.


3.  Use `countymurders.dta` to answer this question. The variable
    $murders$ is the number of murders reported in the county. The
    variable $execs$ is the number of executions that took place of
    people sentenced to death in the given country. Most states in the
    United States have the death penalty, but several do not.

    1.  Keep only the most recent year of data. How many counties are
        there in the data set? Of these, how many have zero murders.
        What percentage of countries have zero executions? (Remember,
        use only 1996 data).

    2.  What is the largest number of murders in a county? What is the
        largest number of executions in a county? Why might the average
        number of executions be so small?

    3.  Compute the correlation coefficient between `murders` and
        `execs` and describe what you find. Compare your results with
        the correlation coefficient between `murdrate` and `execrate`.
        Why do they differ?

    4.  What are two characteristics in the data that are highly
        correlated with county murder rates? What are their correlation
        coefficients?

    5.  What is median real per-capita income?

    6.  Generate a variable, `highinc` that is equal to 1 if a county
        has above-median real per capita income, and 0 otherwise. What
        is $E[rpcpersinc  | highinc =0]$? What is\
        $E[rpcpersinc | highinc =1]$?

    7.  Formally set up a two-sided hypothesis test of whether murder
        rates are different between counties with high (above median) vs
        low (below median) real per-capita personal income. Assume the
        two samples are independent, with equal variances. *Hint: see
        the help file for `ttest`, and use the `highinc` variable you
        generated earlier*.\
        Report the null hypothesis, alternative hypothesis, the decision
        rule, and the relevant t-statistic. Can you reject the null
        hypothesis at the 5% level?

    8.  Generate a variable, `perc1029`, that is equal to the share of
        the population between the ages of 10 and 20. What is the median
        share of the population by county that is ages **10-29**?

    9.  Generate a variable, `young`, that is equal to 1 if a county has
        an above-median share of the population that is age 10-29, and 0
        otherwise. What is $E[perc1029| young =0]$? What is
        $E[perc1029| young =1]$?

    10. Set up a two-sided hypothesis test of whether murder rates are
        different between states with a high (above median) share of the
        population ages **10-29** versus a low share. Assume the two
        samples are independent, with equal variances.\
        Report the null hypothesis, alternative hypothesis, the decision
        rule, and the relevant t-statistic. Can you reject the null
        hypothesis at the 5% level?

## Sources {#sources .unnumbered}

`countymurders.dta`

Source: Compiled by J. Monroe Gamble for a Summer Research Opportunities
Program (SROP) at Michigan State University, Summer 2014. Monroe
obtained data from the U.S. Census Bureau, the FBI Uniform Crime
Reports, and the Death Penalty Information Center.

`acs2004_all.dta`

Source: Steven Ruggles, Katie Genadek, Ronald Goeken, Josiah Grover, and
Matthew Sobek. American Community Survey, 2014. Integrated Public Use
Microdata Series: Version 6.0 \[dataset\]. Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota, 2015. <http://doi.org/10.18128/D010.V6.0.>
